Three feet, so the bottom four rows.
Do you have a rough idea of how much material?
I can't think of that.
Do you have a system of prioritization?
Yes, definitely.
How are you going about prioritizing materials?
Materials that can't be replaced.
These are all priority one.
No, what's on the talk shop is dry.
I see, okay.
That's priority two.
Priority one is the material obviously that was wet.
Right, that was an easy one.
But I mean, I don't mean priority in terms of... I mean, priority in terms of...
And so, would you say that this is the area which was in terms of irreplaceable, the most afflicted area?
I can't say that.
I don't know.
What, more than government documents?
I can't say that.
I realize you're very busy.
Down in the corner there are science project books.
You can take them with you if you want.
They are replaceable, not worth that much money, and I don't care.
Nobody cares.
We can go to the stacks and replace that collection, even if it's wet.
So those aren't on any priority.
So they are probably not going to go to Fort Worth.
Correct.
They're not going to go.
Okay, well, this is what I'm asking.
The stuff that was all over the floor here.
You know, we've got someone here, we've got some book jackets with no books anymore, and we're trying to make a list so we'll at least know what was gone.
The shelf list to this department is now being microfilmed because at least we'll have a record of what we used to have.
You seem to be really very organized.
Do you have a kind of an emergency plan?
We did not have a plan, no.
So this is all pretty much by the seat of everyone's plan?
We're very professional, responsible.
We're science librarians.
We came up with a plan.
That's great.
What's your phone extension?
Maybe I'll call you like next week when things settle down.
It was 265.
It was down here.
We're not going to be down here.
And Meryl, what's your title?
Curator, science reference.
I know Billy Connor, the Los Angeles Public Library, and these people went through all this.
which is in my book, by the way.
Is it?
All right, we'll get an autograph.
Thank you so much.
Would you mind if I take a few photographs?
Yes, go right ahead.
Okay, thank you.
I understand.
Thank you.
You're doing wonderfully.
She said she knows my book.
Yeah, I read his book.
You want to just walk me around?
Everyone is very upset.
I'm sorry?
You're also losing records and CDs.
Records and CDs?
Do you have a rough idea of... No, I mean, I just... You were saying, is it just books, so if you talk to Mr. Margolis, you should get an idea.
Okay.
I understand.
But records, vinyl records, are they badly damaged by water as well?
I found there yesterday.
I'm not sure if the records are badly damaged.
Ed Benninger is the one to talk to.
However... Who's the one to talk to?
Ed.
F-E-N-N.
Okay, good.
I-N-G.
However, there's a lot of checking because some of the records have been...
cut and moist, and they need to be clean.
What's your name, sir?
Henry Scannell.
S-E-A-N-N-E-L.
And what do you do, sir?
I'm a microforms librarian.
Microforms.
Yes, it's all microfilm.
Okay, and do you have a rough idea of what the loss is?
I realize everybody's talking about it.
Well, it's in the tens of thousands.
I'm not sure if it's a loss.
Oh, damn it.
So I don't think you have any idea you have a block.
Do you work the same way to save by performance, to go through the same freezing?
I believe that's what they're planning on.
And so what are we looking at here?
These are a set of Canadian patents.
Are these also, as Marilyn said, irreplaceable kinds of things?
No.
Microfilm, by its nature, you can buy a new copy.
However, if you can afford it, you can buy a new copy.
She said that stuff is irreplaceable.
How is it irreplaceable over there?
Because nobody else has copies.
Nobody else has copies.
I presume that's what she meant.
I'm not sure what she was referring to when she read it.
But with film,
Generally, it's purchased from a commercial institution, and they have the negative, so a new copy can be made.
So a price can be replaced?
No, you're taking these out singly, one at a time?
No, I've been taking them out in blocks, and they'll be going like the books to be frozen and dried.
I don't know how much of it is going to be irreplaceably damaged.
I'm not really in the conservation part of it.
I understand.
Mr. Stuart Walker, who is the person in the book, is very nauseous.
He is going to actually take you.
You could just have an opportunity to be in contact.
This will go out if necessary, if it's tooth badly damaged.
The film can be replaced.
However, whether or not we can afford to replace it is another question.
All right.
Can you just shoot a couple of tracks?
Can you just shoot a couple of catch tracks?
I'm sorry I got a couple of tracks and what they're doing here.
Whatever artists need to do.
Okay.
I would like to check on the emotional stability of one of our employees.
You're all set?
Thank you so much.
No problem.
Have you gone into the first... I haven't.
Okay.
Oh, yes, okay.
He said we're in the government documents.
This is the government documents reading room and reference material.
This gentleman is writing a book on, I guess, libraries in general, is it?
Culture, preservation, technology.
Art said he could come down and do that.
Yeah, if you want to, I don't know.
Actually, you said you have about five minutes worth of stuff to do?
Yeah, I just go.
So how about if I just wander around and take a few shots on the defense?
Why don't you stay here sort of where I can find you?
Okay, I'll be here.
Great.
Yep.
uh...
This one is fixed, but I think no, it's part of the same thing.
This is an area which brought all of the areas that were in a deep dark scary
19th century basement until a few years ago.
And about 68 and 64, until how many years ago, I'm sorry?
And this was all... The office of renovating the old building began several years ago, but I would say we occupied this space
Maybe about two years ago.
So it was renovated, and I see obviously you have computer equipment.
Well, right.
Everything you see is new.
Everything.
The structure of the ceilings, the treatment of the columns, there was nice carpeting, you know, there's been nice lighting, there's been all this computer work.
So there was carpeting that's already been renewed.
It's imperative to get off the carpeting to begin to lower the relative humidity.
So that's done immediately.
Just give me your full name again.
Stuart, S-T-U-A-R-T.
S-T-U-A-R-T.
Do you use a middle initial?
I don't.
And Rare Books?
I'm the book conservator.
That's your point.
The conservator.
That's within the Rare Book Department.
Within Rare Book.
What's your extension here?
I want to obviously call you back when you have a little time.
431.
So what's the most important thing you do immediately after a crisis like this?
The initial thing that you've got to do is establish priorities.
Right.
Decide what you're going to salvage, because you can't salvage everything.
You've got to sort of first acknowledge that you're not going to be able to save everything.
Once you've done that, then you begin to triage.
and you begin to say, you know, what's going to live, what's going to die, essentially.
And quickly, as quickly as possible, do the appropriate thing to salvage those materials, which in most cases means freezing it.
Freezing buys you time.
And this is established procedure, right?
Yes, yes.
Freezing buys you time.
You can always, you know, it's already wet.
You can always re-wet it by thawing.
Or if you can't, depending on what the material is,
you can freeze dry material, which is actually removing, once you've frozen the material, you remove the water vapor directly from ice without being passed back through the water phase.
You go through a process called sublimation chemically, which is dropping a vacuum.
I can't remember technically exactly what, but we can find that out for you.
Drawing a vacuum,
adding a slight amount of heat, I think in this case it's going to be about 15 degrees Fahrenheit, at that atmospheric pressure with that heat, water boils.
So you've got boiling water, but you don't have boiling liquid water because it's too cold.
So essentially what happens to your wet wash on a winter day on the line,
The wind, you know, it freezes stiff as a board, and then a few hours later, it's dry.
It went out wet, it froze, it dried.
Let me ask a question.
This happened over the weekend, right?
Yeah, it happened Sunday morning, about 31 o'clock in the morning.
So when did you hear about it?
I heard about it Sunday evening.
So several hours after that?
Oh, yeah, several hours.
I mean, first off, there were just hours of...
of public works people, fire trucks, custodial staff from here saying, you know, we can't stop it, we can't stop it.
So the water was just... It was a few inches deep.
Then it was six inches deep.
And so on.
And the custodial staff kept calling.
Oh, about 2 o'clock, I guess, they became really alerted that things were desperately bad.
But 3 o'clock, they started making serious calls, 4, 5 o'clock.
The response all began happening since there's staff here at all times.
And Public Works, I guess, notified the staff that there was a water main break.
The custodial staff that was here at the time came to check it out, and then they began to call people as it became clear that it was getting out of control.
What time did you arrive on the scene?
Oh, not until I came home from vacation after two weeks, growing a beard.
And the first thing that happens Sunday night is, you know, hi, guess what?
First call was, don't come in, the library is closed.
Second call was,
Can you come in?
We need your expertise.
So, that's fine.
I arrived about 8 o'clock in the morning on Monday.
And was the place fully engulfed in water when you arrived here?
Engulfed is not the right word.
No.
It had gone from about 30 to 36 or so inches of water down to, oh, you know, slogging through it with boots.
But the lights were all off, and it was a truly nightmarish situation of blackened rooms with flashlight beams crisscrossing back and forth and reflecting on the water and things dripping.
What's the approximate square footage in this space?
I don't know.
I'm not really bad at that.
But do we believe there are about 100,000 items down here or in excess?
All told, all told, in the reading rooms and in the stacks, which I want to take you into,
I think we figure there are close to a million items.
In printed format alone, and that does not mean, yeah, in printed format we have approximately
Yeah, I'd say 987,000 plus 6,200, whatever that comes out to.
6,200 what?
6,200, those are reference volumes like in these rooms.
Okay, I see.
And documents and other... Documents makes you feel like a single sheet of paper, but in fact, we're talking about government documents for publications.
So paperback publications.
Does that include microfilm?
No.
Then you go to microfiche,
5,940,000, approximately 6 million microfiche.
Wow.
The low estimate of the damaged fiche is about 40%, so over two and a quarter million.
Two and a quarter million items?
Yes, of fiche.
So when they were saying 100,000 in the paper, that's just a fragment of the story.
That's not correct.
Let's talk about books.
Now, the reason they came up with that is we have here
Okay, great.
So things are moving down.
If we figure 30% of what's available down here is lost, we would figure about 296,000.
But that's a very, very highest end of what's down there.
We don't think it's that high.
We think it's about half that.
So we'd say probably 100,000 or so is about right.
We won't know.
Are you working under the rubric of the rare books department?
Yeah.
How much of this material is irreplaceable in your view?
Well, of course, none of this is rare book material.
In fact, you certainly haven't understood what we're talking about.
Yeah, no, I understand what you mean, of course.
The 19th century German patent material would probably be almost irreplaceable.
We are the library of last recourse for much of the eastern coast of the United States, certainly the northeast region.
The library of last recourse for what?
The northeast region of the United States.
For American?
For government documents.
And for?
One section of it.
Yeah, state and federal.
And this is colonial and microfiche form?
No, microfiche and paper.
The patent material, I'm not sure if that's, I don't frankly remember whether the patent material is.
This goes back to?
No, I haven't.
I haven't seen Marilyn.
I got down here about 12 o'clock and I'd be... Yeah, well, I know where you were.
Yeah, well, that's true.
You're right, of course.
You were there, too.
So you mentioned the kind of triage procedure.
Let me just finish that up.
The patent material.
Material on patents.
When I say material, it's actually just the information.
Who said what patent?
What is it?
What are the details?
We get patent searches here.
That's over in Science, primarily.
I have the figures up here, but I can't remember what they are, but a huge number of hits for patent numbers.
I mean, again, Art would probably tell you that.
He was at the meeting, too.
I can call you and get this.
Yeah, I can sometimes get that together.
Patents, there's something called the ANSI standards, A-N-S-I, American something, Science Institute, maybe.
The ANSI standards are incredibly valuable.
The patents, those are the two things that I keep hearing talk about all the time.
Over here,
You will like the snoring, I think.
Over here, there's a lower shelf, and the lower shelves got soaked.
The material expanded to about one and a half times its original shape.
It wedged itself between the oak board and could not be physically removed.
We had ten men and a boy, that kind of thing.
yanking on the bottom shelf of books that could not get them out there was over behind that on that wall over there there was one little tiny red down volume um about so high surrounded by towering other materials which had all expanded over it like the leaves of a tree
It contains the index to census records for the United States from 1790 to 1972 with penciled notations.
The only copies, the only notations of where that material is to be found within this library couldn't physically be removed from the shelf.
We actually had to use a three-foot crowbar.
to crowbar the material out of the shelves, thereby deciding, speaking of triage, what item are we going to hook the crowbar on, which one of these reference books.
So they had to do it.
They determined.
That's the nice thing about government documents.
Most of them are replaceable.
You know, they're government crying about publications.
So I mean, here were things with, well, yes, we don't want to lose that, but no, we can replace that.
OK.
Get the Masonite.
Get the .
It took a lot, even with the three-foot crowbar, it took 20 minutes of hard work to get it out.
Nothing I ever expected to do in my life.
So to go back though, I mean, you said you were making life and death decisions on you can't save everything.
So what kind of snap decisions were you making?
I wasn't, because I'm not a curator in this.
Those decisions were being left up to the curators in each department.
But time was of the essence.
Yes, but you have about 48 hours before— I mean, the critical thing is not only getting the material salvaged and up off the ground, but you have about 48 hours before mold begins to grow.
When the collection begins to get moldy,
You're faced with a catastrophic loss, irreplaceable loss.
This stuff we can send off to be freeze-dried, and they'll come back to you, oddly enough, looking almost like nothing happened to it.
Yes, because it'll be dirty, but it'll be surface dirt, and you can brush it off.
The freeze-drying actually sucks dirt that's embedded itself in the material to the top of the page.
You can brush that dirt off.
Many times they'll come back unwarped, undamaged.
Now this Fort Worth group that you got in, you got them?
Yeah, but after we lost the day to city haggling because of being a bureaucracy, being a city library, well, I'm sorry, we need three competitive bids.
Jesus.
Yeah, so we had to deal with that, and that went until 11 o'clock one night.
Are there three companies that do this?
Of course not.
And there are different aspects of different... There's the dehumidification services, the chilling services, the freeze-drying services, the crates.
You know, some people could supply one but not the other.
So the city had to get on and get its you-know-what out of you-know-where and acknowledge the fact that, oh, this is different.
That happened, but we lost many hours.
We've got good people in.
They're addressing the issues.
We've already filled up and had taken away one 48-foot refrigerated truck, which blast-froze everything that came into it.
Where are these trucks home-ported?
Did they come up?
We sort of rent them from Joe's.
For meats, even.
The city has its own contacts that it was utilizing.
Once the contract is then awarded, we made it very clear
and the stuff had to be frozen.
Okay, they could go that far.
And they have a company called ServiceMaster who's known to the city, who's a normal city contract.
They do do...
I mean, they had access to the freezer.
They're the ones who brought in the lights.
They brought in the snakey yellow things with the chilled air.
What are those yellow things for?
They bring cold, refrigerated air into the... So what do you call them?
They're just tubes of some sort, I guess.
Snakey yellow coils.
But they bring in chilled air.
Yes, and that's being pumped in from outside the building.
And again, the purpose to do that is to... Lower the temperature.
Three things that you have to do.
Lower the temperature.
dehumidify and circulate the air.
So we have little air blowers, fans everywhere.
We've got chillers.
And unfortunately, we weren't able to bring in the dehumidifiers early for a two-fold problem.
The first was because the city was dicking around with its business of what to provide what.
The second was that much of the electricity was fried.
in here, and so you have to be able to plug your dehumidifier into something.
So we had to restore electrical service before we could actually get the dehumidifiers going.
Even until last night, the electricity in the library was not able to support the machinery.
As of this morning, it is.
I'm not necessarily asking you to comment on this, but maybe you will.
What I'm really so impressed by is that the attitude is that we have to save as much as we can.
I bet makes that sound pretty obvious, but you know, if I were to tell you in the San Francisco Public Library, when there was an earthquake out there in 1989, the then librarian was quoted as saying, and I asked him this, Ken Dallin, and he confirmed it, that he saw that as an opportunity to clean out the RGU stables.
What a great opportunity to get rid of a bunch of shit, in other words.
Well, I was just at a trustees meeting, and someone at the end of the meeting made the kind of sly remark that some people are not, I mean, obviously everybody's devastated, but some people have said this is a great opportunity to get rid of a lot of the direct that we've wanted to get rid of for years.
And do you agree with that?
Do you agree with that?
Well, I don't know.
I mean, again, I don't work here.
I work in rare books, so you wouldn't want to necessarily... I mean, he actually has some drag in rare books.
What's wrong with that?
I mean, Marilyn told me down there to do something.
Well, let me show you.
There are science books.
She says, you can take all you want with you when you go.
We can replace them.
But, for example, I'll show you one thing.
Okay.
Let's go back and around.
I'm so glad I came in today.
This is, this is, I can guarantee you, this is going to be the, I just know this.
Now you're writing a book, you have a little place, and you're writing non-fiction books, you have to,
Five little things.
Go ahead.
I'm sorry.
All right.
Look here.
I'm sorry.
Can I just do the visual?
Yep.
Oh, wow.
Yeah.
Great.
Do you want to get over it?
I'm not sure what's going on.
I'm just going to shut it.
Yeah.
How are you doing?
I'm sorry, thank you.
So, yeah, I mean, this is what we're facing.
And here's the air circulation.
We have many.
We have a little portable power fan.
Here's the storage.
The force of the water not, in part, not matured off the shell.
You see it went up to the second, in some cases about halfway up to the third shell, but mostly the second.
The water line, here's the water line right here.
You can see it.
Oh, wow.
That was edited by twice.
I'm fine, I'm fine.
That's pretty nice.
Yeah, but it didn't, you know, obviously there's a terrible loss.
That's the water line.
Now, if you walk down here, let's go get back over this.
This is the corner where the water man broke.
Partly, partly it looks like the power of the water, but in reality, a lot of why these things have blown up the cells is because they expanded to the point where they suddenly went far.
They just expanded to the point where they suddenly went far.
I don't know.
So where does the mic come from?
I have to do it from the left side.
Oh, yeah, it's 30 days before the end.
Oh, that's 30 days before the end.
I just want to listen to the mic.
I want to listen to the mic.
This is the original material for the 1895 construction of the building, too.
It's a nice claw clip.
Wonderful.
That's the kind of thing I saw at an auction I'd buy in a minute, you know?
I know.
I don't feel like you love anything bibliographic in that.
Oh, this is really something.
Yeah, this is where the... Oh, look here.
Oh, man.
Rivers and parls and mounds, that here is...
It's a foot deep of silt.
Well, it's just... Essentially, this is the corner of the building where it all happened.
We're now in the corner.
What corner?
Where are we with?
Southeast corner.
Corner of Dartmouth and Blagden Streets.
Dartmouth?
And what's the name it is?
Blagden.
B-L-A-G-D-E-N.
The street is up there.
Yeah, actually, the street is over there and over there.
We're under a granite platform, which extends out in front of the building, along which sit two mammoths.
And we're in the McKim building, of course, right?
Yeah, this is the original building, 1895.
And this was not a floor in the building or anything.
This was a water main that had nothing... Water main, not far over there, but off the corner here.
And it...
I think it was a 45 inch water pipe.
But if it's about... Either it's just over or almost a hundred degrees over the pipe.
You call it silt or much what do you call this?
Yeah, it's pretty sandy in a way.
Silt, I guess.
Now this stuff we're looking at, this is rough, but it's humid.
But the material you would describe, again, government documents type things?
Yes, right.
So these are, I mean, you figure you've got a million, but you're counting about things like this.
I'm wondering if you'll, well, these are the same.
Well, yeah, but still the humidity down here is such that mold could begin growing on this, and mold dissolves
And he uses a living organism to eat cellulose, because it's made up of cellulose, and he just becomes a fun boy.
Wow.
So a lot of, a lot of accidents come up, and it didn't come up.
I mean, it didn't really come through the wall.
It kind of came weird.
The thing is that actually we don't quite know how it got into the building.
The water?
It came up through the floor.
It came between, you know, where the floor and the wall is.
There's no obvious crack anywhere.
The water just seemed to suddenly bubble up and into the building.
Amazing.
Do you think you'll ever find out?
And the mud came in with it, didn't it?
Yeah, sure.
So it's not just water coming into... There has to be some kind of major eruption.
The entire conference fair was underwater outside of the doors.
Look at that.
That's exactly what you were talking about.
Look how that stuff was forced out.
Yeah, right.
That's it.
There's a funny story on the paper that they say.
in a related matter of a guy in a convertible Mercedes.
I heard about that.
A guy who insisted on going ahead.
A $100 ticket and his car broke down.
And his car got $40.
Just a second.
I think I want to show you still.
I want to take a picture of showing you very volumes here.
So just take a second.
Okay.
I know you're busy.
I thought I'd take a tour some time.
The thing is that it's a base that normally
Most institutions acknowledge or practice their practices.
We don't store things in basements.
We don't store paper-based material in basements because of the high humidity level.
What do you do if you don't have food?
That is the exact problem.
What do you do?
What do you do if you do this?
Basements are basically... I went out to San Francisco where they've got a million items.
You've heard of the Brooks Hall?
You know, when they built the new library, it had less space than the one they were leaving.
I did hear that.
And then, so what they did is they put stuff in an old auditorium underground, which is have the pictures of these pictures or something.
I mean, this is the way stuff has been now for the last few years.
I didn't hear you for a while.
I got a picture of you, if you don't mind.
With those old books as a backdrop and that little snake coil there.
Excellent, thank you.
This is great.
Everything from here is from what I was having to say.
And this, was this a reading room here?
This is where you were.
I mean, this is, we call this a reading room.
There were a lot of lawyers in here all the time.
So undoubtedly things...
Are you sending off everything that's wet to Fort Worth?
Or again, are you prioritizing?
It's going to... At this point, we have most of the really critical stuff of Freezer Crux.
We're going to make a decision about where to store and how to treat the dry material.
The dry material that's humid.
That sign is terrific.
This here.
Okay.
I do everything and take my pictures.
It's a shame the bottom of these limestone pillars here with the dirt that's gotten absorbed into the nuts about where the height of the water was.
It was about at the base of the pillar and then they absorbed them.
We've got it up to the next layer.
Do you think that'll be a permanent situation?
I don't know.
It's all brand new.
It's all brand new in the hall.
Oh, I see.
Yeah.
The stairway didn't exist.
Really?
No.
It's part of the first phase of the renovation of the building.
One more picture.
I think it's Safety Razor Division.
Okay.
Safety Razor Division.
Wow.
And it is the Gillette Corporation, which is a Boston company.
Of course, yeah.
Walmart has donated a lot of materials.
Gillettes, we've got some dairies, local dairies that have donated milk cartons, which can be first described.
It almost is, I mean, you don't want to stretch the medical metaphor,
It really is almost like a medical emergency, isn't it?
I think I'm going to let you go back to your work.
I'd like to give you a call
We've never had a disaster like this here.
We're depending on contactors whom we don't personally have a lot of experience with.
We have to deal with the issues of access to materials over time.
At what point do you think—do you have an idea at all of what we're talking about roughly in terms of money?
Oh, no, I have no idea.
There's no idea.
And even if I knew, I wouldn't mind.
Well, did this company quote per item, or is it time?
It's—I think it's like a linear foot.
Ah.
Do you know what the quote is on that, roughly?
Seems like it was $40 a foot.
That's not bad.
Well, not when you consider the cost of replacement of oil.
Well, I mean, the Sland Bookstore in New York rents books out from $10 to $200 a million a foot.
You know, just for decoration, yeah.
I just wrote a piece about it.
That's fascinating.
I had no idea.
That's all we got to cost you.
That's really interesting.
That's the process for drawing, and then I guess whatever else,
Did you want to see any of the rest of the building?
No, I've been in here hundreds of times.
And I've been coming here.
9 o'clock Monday morning.
9 o'clock on Monday morning, staff came in and immediately sat down.
to determine priorities for saving.
We had lists up on the walls, people on tripods with big sheets of paper and people with magic markers.
Things got fast fired out and then as people further discussed that, items got moved up or down depending on priority.
The staff response has been extraordinary.
I'm kind of a jaded 16-year veteran here who has his issues about
how things are run, as we all do in probably any bureaucratic institution.
And I don't mean it to sound sort of starry-eyed and dewy.
But I'm really proud to end up working in this situation with these people.
You have people who haven't spoken to each other because they're either in the general library or the reference library, or they're professionals or their library assistants, depending on the union they're in, working together, working well, working solidly, accomplishing a tremendous amount of stuff.
Where are you from, Stuart?
Are you from Boston, Massachusetts?
Yeah, Massachusetts.
Did you go to library school?
No, I'm not.
No, as a conservator, I learned really the craft of book finding and paper restoration.
I worked at the Northeast Document Conservation Center, which is the big place to actually go see.
I was in Leipzig last year.
I went actually to see the mass deacidification and stuff.
Leipzig?
I'm really, really serious.
Bookman Grechter, who was at Leipzig for years, pioneered one very interesting...
uh process by which fragile material could be uh delaminated and then the both sides pasted back they have what they call this page splitter yes right and then and then what they have is what they call leaf casting oh yeah well it's very interesting so that's the that's the field i come out is conservation
And I worked, in fact, at the Document Center for four years.
When I left, I was the head of book conservation at NEDCC.
I went into private practice, my wife and baby, couldn't make a living, you know, I just was a bad manager.
I needed to work within the gentle restraining hand of their necessities.
They got a grant here in the Selvester Conservation Lab in 82, and I hired Bob Corcoran.
Do you have a regular structured little books preservation program in place?
Well, yes and no.
Certain aspects of newspapers.
There's a newspaper project for my ongoing newspapers.
And then discarding the old newspapers?
We had a little bit of a survey.
in which, like most other research libraries, we discovered about 35 percent.
I was going to say 30 percent, right.
So that's two million books, two million plus.
Of which figures?
Well, if it's 35 percent, you've got 6.8 billion.
I mean, I'm just doing big enough math on it.
That librarian has about 13 million books.
So the globe had that wrong this morning.
That's one department, one area.
Maybe that's the research library, if you consider.
If you consider the entire system.
So it's much more than just maybe four million.
Are you familiar with the phrase?
I was up at Cornell interested in their pioneering efforts in the digital, the digitization, blah, blah, blah.
They have what they call their phased deterioration.
You ever hear of that expression?
That's a nice way of saying we've made a qualitative decision on certain books not to do it, again, to go back to the medical meta imagery, not to do anything heroic, not to do any invasive procedures, make the book comfortable, and let it die a natural death.
I mean, do you make similar kinds of decisions here on books, books that maybe... We do what's called phase boxing in many cases, which is a quick temporary box for something which...
is either falling apart or is too nice, so you want to keep it looking nice.
It may not warrant the constant expense of a handmade clamshell box.
But the book itself will not go through any kind of... It's kind of the same.
We clearly do decide what to work on and what not to work on.
Most of that entirely is based on manpower and staffing.
And the acknowledgment that item-by-item conservation is an incredibly expensive product.
What the weeding number is here?
Are you involved in that?
No, I don't know.
That is part of the whole Little Books preservation program.
Whether it's all done in a focused manner, I don't know.
I do know that many years ago under the previous administration, when we had this—was it the New York Public Library, I guess, was the organization?
in either consulting on the Brittle-Brooks Books survey that we had done in the early 90s, like I said, or late 80s.
We developed, as a result of all that information, a coherent, cohesive, scheduled Brittle-Brooks Identification and Replacement Program, took it to the director at that time,
who just said, it's nice.
And unfortunately, that was the management style here for many years.
And new ideas are, as in those bureaucracies, new ideas are threatening.
And there was a real sense that things would be too expensive.
A lot of libraries have policies of one book in, one book out.
I mean, you've probably heard of that.
You know, it's...
Even at Cornell, they've decided that there will never be more than 5 million books on campus.
You know, they have 6.8.
They do have off-site storage.
But the trustees said no more space on campus for books.
Well, I've actually somewhat related to that.
I have heard that a 40% loss rate here, I bought it, is acceptable.
Now, that could mean... You mean, we're talking about what?
In general.
Two libraries in general.
That could mean...
uh deaccessioning loss through embrittlement that accident i'm going to let you go back to work thank you so much this is excellent now well i'll be in touch good thanks a lot appreciate it bye-bye
Thank you.